well good afternoon everybody welcome to
my planetarium show for march of 2021.
i've got the system set up here with uh
a view over the cambridgeshire
countryside
and we're at about two o'clock in the
afternoon with the sun high in the sky
i'm going to let time run forward now
and
the sun will set off over towards the
west
sink down and head for sunset
there it goes gradually the sky will
turn to the familiar
colours of orange and red of sunset and
then
darken and once we get to about six
o'clock
we should start to see the first stars
appearing
this guy's darkening down now here we go
there's the first few stars and there's
the familiar winter constellation
of orion right in the center of the view
there
just to the left was serious but we're
going to start over here
at the constellation of aries now aries
the ram
is one of the constellations of the
zodiac not a very prominent one you can
see the stick diagram there
has just a few stars in it and none of
them are particularly bright
and there's the representation of the
ram
now we've chosen to start at ares the
with it being one of the constellations
in which
the plane of the solar system lies from
the earth's point of view the so-called
plane of the ecliptic
we're going to plot the line of the
ecliptic here
this orange line and this is where we
find the planets
and the first of those for tonight's
tour is the planet uranus
just off the line here here it is a
small green disc
as you'd see it with a small telescope a
medium-sized telescope will show it a
bit larger
and show up to about five of its family
of moons there's many more but most of
the rest are very small
these are named after sprites in
shakespeare's plays
and so we have oberon titania miranda
umbriel and ariel here's the planet
itself very faint pastel
green color with a few cloud belts like
going around its equator not very much
by way of features to see on the surface
it also has a family of rings but
they're not visible from the earth
they're only discovered by the voyager 2
spacecraft
we'll have a look at the moons the moons
are quite easy to find even with a
modest size telescope and it's quite
interesting to try and track down as
many as you can
this one here is titania one of the
largest ones
and some of these moons are constructed
with an
ice crust and a liquid water ocean
underneath and so there's potential
habitable zones
even that far out from the sun but if we
track along
the constellation of the ecliptic we get
to
the next which is taurus
and here's the stick diagram for taurus
the bull
and we'll show the artwork again you'll
see ares just off the screen to the
right
and there's taurus i'm afraid the back
half of taurus the bull is missing
but the face is made up out of that
triangle of stars
and the bright star there aldebaran
is a red giant star a little bit more
massive than our sun
and just 47 light years away
440 light years away we find the
pleiades star cluster the seven sisters
lots of bright hot blue white young
stars
and many many more of the ordinary white
and yellow stars like the sun
or even smaller the little red dwarfs in
that cluster
it's a great target for looking at with
binoculars a little too big to see with
a telescope it tends to
overflow the field of view and you don't
get the full sense of it
so that's the pleiades there riding on
the back of taurus the bull
now over here by one of the stars of the
horns of the bull
we have the crab nebula a little faint
easy to find with the largest telescope
at 10 or 12 inch
aperture and you can get some great
photographs of it with a dslr
showing how the structure within the
expanding supernova remnant
uh has all the filamentary lines of
gaseous hydrogen
lit up pink so that's the crab nebula
now just beneath the pleiades over here
and also next to the plane of the
ecliptic we have another planet
and that is the planet mars it's getting
a little bit further away from the earth
now as we're accelerating around our
orbits and pulling away from it
and we're seeing it's three-quarter
phase
on rather than the full disc at the
moment
mars has two moons phobos and dmos dmos
is shown there phobos actually behind
the planet
at this precise time that we're looking
you can also see on the face of mars
there
one of the large volcanoes that's not
the largest in the solar system the
olympus mons it's one of the others
over in the elysium region but
nevertheless quite a big volcano
so we'll pull back away from mars and
taurus
and you can see orion there to the left
and the bright star
sirius just on the screen at the extreme
left
so these are the familiar constellations
of the winter sky
and what we're going to do is let time
run forward a little bit
towards 9 pm so the sky is fully dark
and we'll say goodbye to those as they
sit
down towards the west and we'll alter
our gaze
up here just above orion to the next
constellation in the zodiac
and that's gemini the twins you can see
the two
bright stars at the heads of the stick
men there there's a caster and pollocks
the two bright uh stars that lead the
constellation
there's the two twins themselves and you
can see the horns of taurus the bull
just on the left there
there's quite a few interesting objects
to find in
the constellation of gemini one of them
is another supernova remnant
this is the jellyfish nebula you can see
why it's named that way it looks like
the crown of the jellyfish with the
tendrils at the bottom there
here's the hubble space telescope view
we'll bring that in in full detail for
you
here it comes i'm afraid it's been
slightly photo bombed by a satellite
there actually so
maybe we won't look at that another
interesting nebula towards the bottom
there are lots of these uh
lovely nebulae all around this region so
do check out
star charts going to the left of
gemini we get the next constellation
around and this again is not a
particularly prominent one
in terms of bright stars but it's the
constellation of cancer the crab
and uh very much sits in the gap between
leo and gemini
now there's the crab drawn out for you
but you just have one
nice little target right in the center
and that's
a prasipi the beehive cluster
it's a young open cluster of stars very
much worth looking at easily seen with
binoculars or even on a really clear
night you can see it with a naked eye
lots of
hot blue stars lesser white stars and in
the background many more sun-like
yellow dwarf stars can be seen
so that's the bee hive cluster and it's
surrounded by that uh rough
rectangle of four stars so you can
always tell
you're in the right place we'll pull
back a bit more
we've just got uh gemini to the top
right and
the head of leo the lion is just
creeping onto the screen at the left
there
it's that backwards question mark shape
pull back a little further
and we'll go and have a look at the
constellation of leo
so you can see the backward question
mark shape and
the body of leo the lion there
it really does look like a lion
and when we're looking in this direction
we're actually looking straight up
out of the plane of the galaxy which is
a very short route going out to space
so there's not very much by way of
intervening dust
and this makes it a great area to go
galaxy hunting there's
a little trio there in the center m 95
96 and 105 also one down to the
bottom right of the screen you can go
and catch all four of those
in very short order all different
here's another one ngc 2903 the
catherine wheel
a very much a barred spiral probably
very similar to the milky way
that's about 30 million light years away
so it's
not an enormous distance but it's
certainly outside of our local
group of galaxies
so we'll pull back away from there
and have another look just at the tail
of uh leo the lion here
we've got an asteroid the brightest of
the asteroids and if you have a
telescope
you won't see it like this this is way
too much zoomed in you'd have to be in
orbit around it to see it like this i
think
it's very tiny target it's only 500
kilometers across
but it has a magnitude of uh
around eight and so it's fairly
straightforward to find
and the nice thing about tracking down
an asteroid is
that you can see it moving hour by hour
through the constellation
they move relatively quickly against the
background of stars
they should be able to pick it up with
binoculars
also there are so many more galaxy
clusters
in leo i noticed another one just below
where vesta is there
just below the tail of the lion but what
we're going to do is now move
on over towards the east and we'll just
take it through the night to two o'clock
in the morning
and scanning across the sky here
time and passing rapidly
bring it to a halt now and we should
find that
around about this time the full moon
will be above the horizon
so here's the moon very close to that
other star there
and you can see some of the lovely
features on the left hand side the very
bright
crater aristarchus the brightest feature
on the moon
also see copernicus and kepler
against the back ground of the dark grey
of the ocean of storms
but it's well worth having a look and
that's over there in the constellation
of libra
virgo up to the right and we're just
going to be
moving up here there's virgo we go up
above virgo we've got
bootes with the bright star of
arcturus and ursa major the plow
you can always see the plow and ursa
major from
cambridge and it's well worth having a
look
at you can use the two stars at the top
right there
there's pointers to find the pole star
so we'll spin this guy around now and
we've got a ursa major there that's a
minor just to the top right
and we're going to let time run through
to dawn now so the
sun's going to come up so that's a
whistle stop tour of the night sky
for the 3rd of march of 2021
thank you very much